---
date: 2004-03-13T01:51:00+00:00
title: hey... want to come work at MSDN?
type: posts
---
Turns out we (MSDN) are looking for a few good testers to come and work with us in Redmond... if you are interested in a position, and the following job description (which you may have also seen on [Laura](http://blogs.msdn.com/lauraj/archive/2004/03/12/88709.aspx) or [Kent's](http://weblogs.asp.net/ksharkey/archive/2004/03/12/88788.aspx) blog...) is appealing, let us know via [this link](http://www.microsoft.com/careers/search/details.aspx?JobID=aacc453a-e5a2-48fe-b25b-d82ec1c8bd30).

> _Are you ready to join an exciting team? MSDN is revolutionizing the way developers get the resources and information they need. MSDN Test is looking for an experienced SDE/T to help mentor and lead a team of testers responsible for delivering quality releases bringing MSDN forward as a .Net showcase. Key areas of responsibility will be functional, performance, and security testing, as well as a hands-on roll in ensuring the quality of our releases.
>
> A successful candidate will be passionate about software development, testing, and releasing great products for our customers. The candidate should have excellent writing and communications skills, superior analytical skills, and a strong understanding of the software development process and testing methodology. The successful candidate should be adept with C#, XML, ASP, ASPX, VB.Net, .NET Framework, SQL. Additional experience with Darwin and MadDog would be a bonus. The ideal candidate should have experience with testing both web-based products as well as packaged products, with at least 3 years of testing experience (including at least one full product cycle). A BA/BS degree in Computer Science or a related technical field is preferred.</i> </blockquote>
>
> **Update:** Ok folks.... not to be too blunt here, but... **Emailing me directly, or posting comments, is not a good way to apply for this position.** In the post above, I mention that [this is the correct link](http://www.microsoft.com/careers/search/details.aspx?JobID=aacc453a-e5a2-48fe-b25b-d82ec1c8bd30)... so any other method just shows me you didn't bother to carefully read the post... and unless I've worked with you before (and had a good experience), I will not be forwarding your resume on just because you emailed it to me. Sorry for any confusion if that link wasn't clear in the first posting...
