---
date: 2003-06-02T00:19:00+00:00
title: Not about TechEd at all, it is about a fish
type: posts
---
<font face="Verdana" color="teal">Skipped out of work on Friday morning to go sea [Finding Nemo](http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/findingnemo/index.html) with my son. He is only 2yrs old, so he probably isn’t really ready for going to movies as a general practice… but he really enjoyed it. About a month ago I was in Las Vegas and I brought him home a “Nemo” plush fish… I explained that in a month (which is a longer period of time than he can really grasp, but he knew it was “soon, but not now”) he and I would go to a movie with Nemo in it. For the entire month he has been talking (in his own unique way) about it. As the day of the movie drew closer I even started explaining that we would be going to the movie theater and that he could have popcorn and a “fizzy” drink (soft drinks have been a movie theater only experience for the most part) and he started wandering around with his fish muttering “Neh-mo.. pop, pop, pop… Neh-mo” (he’s not much on big sentences, but I had no trouble translating that to Nemo… Popcorn!) for the remaining few days before the movie.

<font face="Verdana" color="teal">We had a blast, he enjoyed the movie (which, if you don’t already know, is about a Dad and his son, so it was a good bonding experience), he enjoyed the popcorn, he brought his Nemo doll… and I don’t think any of it scared him at all… although a few reviews suggested that it might. I definitely recommend the movie, though some folks probably wouldn’t bring a kid until 3 or 4 years of age, it was a fun time for a 2yr old!
